Protecting W-2s This Tax Season

2017-01-13T11:16:15&nbsp;&nbsp;

SSN
It's the beginning of a new year, which means millions of employees are starting to receive the W-2 forms they will need to file their tax returns by April 18, 2017. In fact, this year companies are doing their best to get these crucial forms out before January 31. That's due to the Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes Act, which seeks to help the IRS improve its verification efforts. The law changed the deadline for W-2 issuance, and may also delay some refunds, depending on whether filers benefit from the Earned Income or Child Tax Credits.Despite government efforts, there are still many reasons to believe that every taxpayer is at risk for identity theft this filing season. It's important to understand what these risks are, what is being done on the governmental and employer level to reduce them, and what filers themselves can do to help.What are my identity theft risks?
Tax refund fraud is unfortunately common. According to the IRS, it occurs whenever a thief steals a victim's Social Security Number or employee identification number and uses them to create false tax returns and W-2s. This allows thieves to claim tax refunds that don't belong to them, depriving victims of money that they may have been counting on.The frequency of tax return fraud has fluctuated over the years, depending on the level of government response. In 2014, the IRS estimated that it lost about $6.5 billion to fraudulent returns, according to U.S. News & World Report. The next year, many tax experts expected that amount to increase. However, beginning in 2015, the agency began to implement additional security measures. IRS Commissioner John Koskinen recently announced on a conference call that new reports of stolen identity fell by about 50 percent in 2016, the Fort Worth Star-Telegram reported.What is the IRS doing to protect filers?
One of the most important tools that the IRS has introduced in recent years to protect taxpayers who e-file is the identity protection PIN. This is a six-digit number that can be used to secure tax returns and prevent others from accessing them and misusing the information contained within. In order to obtain a PIN, filers must pass the government's eligibility test and verify their identity. This is particularly crucial for those who have already been victims of identity theft in the past, because it is more likely that thieves may try to use their information again in the future. What should filers do to protect themselves?
Efforts on the part of the IRS to protect tax documents have certainly reduced fraud, but they haven't eliminated it. It's up to tax filers to remain aware of their risks and take action if anything seems amiss.Those who believe that their W-2 information has been stolen should report the theft immediately by contacting the Federal Trade Commission, Social Security Administration and the IRS. This will prevent the fraudulent use of stolen Social Security Numbers. In addition, filers should submit IRS Form 14039, otherwise known as the Identity Theft Affidavit. Finally, it's important to contact the major credit bureaus for a credit freeze.It's always good for people to have someone watching their back and looking out for their identity, even when they are too busy to do so. That's where Identity Guard can help. With our variety of products, we specialize in helping people help protect themselves from identity theft. From a comprehensive credit monitoring program to a personal privacy protection plan, Identity Guard is there.